I thought for a few minutes this morning, we could consider two verses that highlight the
importance of being merciful in our actions, and also highlight the blessings that result
when we are merciful.
The first verse is in Matthew chapter 5, verse 7.
So I invite you to turn there.
Matthew chapter 5, verse 7, and here in the sermon on the mount and the happiness that
introduced this sermon, Jesus said, Happy are the merciful, why?
Since they will be shown mercy.
How is it that the merciful are shown mercy?
A striking example can be found in Acts chapter 9, where we are introduced to a first
century disciple named Tabitha or Dorcas.
She lived in the port city of Japa, and what reputation did Tabitha have?
Well she is described in the Bible as one who abounded in good deeds and gifts of mercy.
How did Tabitha give gifts of mercy?
She was a seamstress, and she used her skill to address a need.
She made garments for needy widows, and they appreciated her gifts of mercy very much,
so that when Tabitha fell ill and died, the widows were grief-stricken.
The disciples in Japa, when they learned that the Apostle Peter was just 11 miles away
in Lidha, sent and asked him to come without delay to Japa.
Peter accepted the invitation, and what did he find in Japa when he got there?
Grieving widows, who bore eloquent testimony to the gifts of mercy that Tabitha had given
them.
Peter was so moved that with the help of Jehovah's Holy Spirit, he did something that
up until that time hadn't happened according to the Bible record.
As an Apostle, he raised someone from the dead.
He resurrected Tabitha, and that was a great mercy to her.
At the point, Tabitha gave gifts of mercy that elicited a merciful act in her behalf.
Happy are the merciful since they will be shown mercy.
Tabitha did what she could.
She used her skill to fill a need.
A gift of mercy may appear to be large or small in the eyes of observers.
But when it's prompted by love and fills a genuine need, it is appreciated.
And more importantly, Jehovah notices just as he noticed Tabitha's gifts of mercy.
The second verse that we want to consider is James chapter 2.
When they're with me, please, James chapter 2, and we're going to read verse 13.
For the one who does not practice mercy will have his judgment without mercy.
Mercy triumphs over judgment.
Now, that's a thought-provoking statement.
How is it that mercy triumphs over judgment?
In the Bible, Jehovah frankly tells us that each of us will render an account for himself
or herself to God.
And when that time comes and Jehovah evaluates us as individuals, he takes into consideration
acts of mercy that we have performed for others.
Now the thought is not that we buy ourselves out of trouble.
The point is that Jehovah sees the kind acts that we're prompted to do by our compassionate
heart, and he takes that into consideration.
Now James frankly addresses the other side of the coin, doesn't he?
The one who does not practice mercy will have his judgment without mercy.
A significant way that you and I can demonstrate mercy is by freely forgiving those who sin
against us.
Is that always easy?
No.
Especially if we've been hurt or damaged, it may be very challenging to make the decision
to forgive.
But how important is it that we demonstrate this kind of mercy?
All the answer to that question is found in another illustration that Jesus gave recorded
in Matthew chapter 18.
There Jesus talked about a slave who was indebted to his master for sixty million denariah.
It was an impossible debt.
If the slave had lived a thousand lifetimes, he couldn't have repaid it.
The master ordered the slave and his family and all that he had to be sold.
The slave begged for mercy.
The master was moved with pity and canceled the entire debt.
What a beautiful gift or act of mercy or what happened next.
The forgiven slave turned around and confronted a fellow slave who owed him one hundred denariah,
just a tiny fraction of what he had been forgiven.
But when his fellow slave couldn't repaid the debt, the forgiven slave had him thrown
into prison.
What an injustice.
And when the master learned of it, he was provoked to wrath.
He asked, should you also not have shown mercy to your fellow slave as I showed mercy to you?
What is the point of application?
Jesus said, my heavenly Father will also deal with you in the same way if each of you
does not forgive your brother from your heart.
So the matter of forgiveness is just that important.
It's been said that forgiveness is like money.
It can be spent freely and mercifully on others, or it can be hoarded stingially.
We can't afford to be stingy with forgiveness.
Instead, it's better to experience the joy that comes from giving by letting go and
canceling the debt.
Consider the experience of a Christian elder named Miguel.
Miguel's grandson was murdered.
The murderer was captured, tried, and imprisoned.
One time later, Miguel was invited to share in the prison ministry.
Can you guess which prison?
That's right.
He was asked to go to the very prison where his grandson's murderer was incarcerated.
At first, Miguel was hesitant.
He didn't know whether he should, but then he decided to accept the invitation.
And sure enough, while in the prison he was confronted by the man who murdered his
grandson.
How would Miguel handle that situation?
With mildness and in a way that promoted peace, he invited the man to join him for the
Bible study.
To Miguel's surprise, the man accepted the invitation.
And after the study, he confessed to Miguel something that he never admitted during
his trial.
He confessed to killing Miguel's grandson.
And then he asked for forgiveness.
What would Miguel do?
Well as it turned out, he studied with the man, and the man progressed to the point of
baptism and became one of our brothers.
But a beautiful gift of mercy and forgiveness.
And a fine example for all of us.
So what if we learned?
If we're merciful, we can be happy because we'll be shown mercy and mercy triumphs over judgment.
If we remember those things, then we will gladly do as Jesus said, go and act mercifully.
Yourself.